---
title: "Extreme Water Level Forecasting of Highway 37 CA"
excerpt: "An assessment of deep learning for flood prediction systems"
header:
    teaser: /assets/images/mlpFloodingSHAP.png
featured_figure:
    image: /assets/images/mlpFloodingSHAP.png
    caption: "Predicting the anomaly of the water level with a neural network (black) and the contributions of the inputs (coloured bars below)."

code: "https://github.com/CompClimate"
people:
  - name: "Avery Wood"
    ccog: true
  - name: "Maike Sonnewald"
    ccog: true
  - name: "John Largier"
    ccog: false
 
tags:
  - ocean
  - deep learning
  - observations
  - probabilistic ML
  - policy

---

## Extreme Water Level Forecasting of Highway 37 CA

Water level systems consist of an abundance of normal tidal behavior but are frequently exposed
to underlying environmental changes that result in extreme high or low water levels. Predicting
when and why these significant changes occur is difficult and requires both an understanding
of the physical water system, as well as a nuanced understanding of modeling techniques that
can accurately predict these changes without sacrificing too much performance during the normal
behavior of the waterway. We specifically look at predicting the water level of the Petaluma
River in Northern California where, currently, linear models perform decently well at modeling
the normal behavior but fall short when exposed to the more extreme values associated with floods.
We use a hierarchy of time series forecasting models including MLPs, LSTMs, and Transformers
to try and address the ability to predict extreme water levels. We found that MLPs and LSTMs
generally perform very well in their ability to predict these extreme water levels while transformers
require more effort to achieve the same. In addition to assessing these models by themselves we
also evaluate them in ensembles comprised of members of a singular type of model. This gives a
more consistent assessment of how these models perform and enables us to validate the models’
fits to the extreme water levels in the data. We do this validation using Shapley Values (SHAP)
to specifically look at feature importance and whether it aligns with our expert knowledge. This
validation technique is also generalizable to any time series forecasting task and is an effective way
at explaining the latent space nonlinear models such as the ones we test here.
